Adding draft for optimizing hybrid search blog post. (#3503)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2024-12-xx-hybrid-search-optimization.md

Reviewer: @wrigleyDan - can you fix the filename? the 'xx' is causing Jeykll not to show the post. 

Please change to '2024-12-30-hybrid-search-optimization.md'

thanks

Author: Done ✅

Reviewer 2: Thanks, Dan!

---
layout: post
title: "Optimizing hybrid search in OpenSearch"
authors:
   - dwrigley

> date: 2024-12-xx

Reviewer 2: Update publish date to 2024-12-26

categories: 
    - technical-posts
    - community
meta_keywords: hybrid query, hybrid search, neural query, lexical search, search relevancy, search result quality optimization 
meta_description: Tackle the optimization of hybrid search in a systematic way and train models that dynamically predict the best way to run hybrid search in your search application.
---

# Introduction

[Hybrid search combines lexical and neural search to improve search relevance](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/hybrid-search); this combination shows promising results across industries and [in benchmarks](https://opensearch.org/blog/semantic-science-benchmarks/).

> In OpenSearch 2.18, [hybrid search](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/hybrid-search/) is a linear combination of the lexical (match query) and neural (kNN) search scores. It first normalizes the scores and then combines them with one of three techniques (arithmetic, harmonic or geometric mean), each of which includes weighting parameters.

Reviewer 2: Change "is a linear combination" to "is an arithmetic combination" per Stavros

The search pipeline configuration is how OpenSearch users define score normalization, combination, and weighting.

# Finding the right hybrid search configuration is hard

The question for a user of hybrid search in OpenSearch is how to choose the normalization and combination techniques and the weighting parameters for their application.

What is best depends strongly on the corpus, on user behavior, and on the application domain – there is no one-size-fits-all solution. 

However, there is a systematic way to arrive at this ideal set of parameters. We call identifying the best set of parameters *global hybrid search optimization*: we identify the best parameter set for all incoming queries; it is “global” because it doesn’t depend on per-query factors. We will cover this approach first before moving on to a dynamic approach that identifies hybrid query parameters individually per query.

# Global hybrid search optimizer

> We treat hybrid search configuration as a parameter optimization challenge. The parameters and combinations are:

Reviewer 2: Change "parameter optimization challenge" to "parameter optimization problem" per Stavros

* Two [normalization techniques: `l2` and `min_max`](https://opensearch.org/blog/How-does-the-rank-normalization-work-in-hybrid-search/)  
* Three combination techniques: arithmetic mean, harmonic mean, geometric mean  

> * The lexical and neural search weights, values in the range from 0 to 1.

Author: that works, changing post accordingly

With this knowledge we can define a collection of parameter combinations to try out and compare to each other. To follow this path we need three things:

1. Query set: a collection of queries.  
2. Judgments: a collection of ratings that tell how relevant a result for a given query is.  

> 3. Search Metrics: a numeric expression of how well the search system does in returning relevant documents for queries

Reviewer 2: Change "Search Metrics: a numeric expression" to "Search Quality Metrics: a numeric expression"

Recently, a third category of generating judgments emerged: LLM-as-a-judge. Here a large language model like GPT-4o judges query-doc pairs.

All three categories have different strengths and weaknesses. Whichever you choose, you need to have a decent amount of judgments. Twice the depth of your default search result page per query is usually a good starting point for explicit judgments. So if you show your users 24 results per result page you should rate the first 48 results for each query.

Implicit judgments have the advantage of scale: when already collecting user events (like queries, viewed documents and clicked documents) this is an enabling step for calculating 1,000s of judgments by modeling these events as judgments.

## Search metrics

> With a query set and the corresponding judgments we can calculate search metrics. Widely used [search metrics are Precision, DCG or NDCG](https://opensourceconnections.com/blog/2020/02/28/choosing-your-search-relevance-metric/).

Reviewer 2: Change "we can calculate search metrics" to "we can calculate search quality metrics"

With that starting point, we can explore the parameter space that hybrid search offers us. Our global hybrid search optimization notebook tries out 66 parameter combinations for hybrid search with the following set:

* Normalization technique: [`l2`, `min_max`]  
* Combination technique: [`arithmetic_mean`, `harmonic_mean`, `geometric_mean`]  
* Lexical search weight: [`0.0`, `0.1`, `0.2`, `0.3`, `0.4`, `0.5`, `0.6`, `0.7`, `0.8`, `0.9`, `1.0`]  
* Neural search weight: [`1.0`, `0.9`, `0.8`, `0.7`, `0.6`, `0.5`, `0.4`, `0.3`, `0.2`, `0.1`, `0.0`]

Neural and lexical search weights always add up to 1.0, so of course we don’t need to choose them independently.

This leaves us with 66 combinations to test: 2 normalization techniques * 3 combination techniques * 11 lexical/neural search weight combinations.

For each of these combinations we run the queries of the training set. To do so we use OpenSearch’s [temporary search pipeline capability](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/search-pipelines/using-search-pipeline/#using-a-temporary-search-pipeline-for-a-request) that saves us from pre-creating all pipelines for the 66 parameter combinations.

> Here is a template of the temporary search pipelines we use for our hybrid search queries:

Author: My feeling here is that present tense is used mainly in the post, so I'd go with present tense here as well.

The following metrics are calculated:

* DCG: 9.99  
* NDCG: 0.26  
* Precision: 0.29

Applying the potentially best hybrid search parameter combination to the test set and calculating the metrics for these queries results in the following numbers:

| Metric | Baseline BM25 - Small | Global Hybrid Search Optimizer - Small | Baseline BM25 - Large | Global Hybrid Search Optimizer - Large |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| DCG@10 | 9.65 | 9.99 | 8.82 | 9.30 |
| NDCG@10 | 0.24 | 0.26 | 0.23 | 0.25 |
| Precision@10 | 0.27 | 0.29 | 0.24 | 0.27 |

We can see improvements across all metrics for both datasets. To recap, up to here, we did the following:

* Create a query set by randomly sampling  
* Generate judgments (to be precise, we only used the existing judgments of the ESCI dataset)  
* Calculate search metrics for a baseline  
* Try out several hybrid search combinations  
* Compare search metrics

Two things are important to note:

> * While the systematic approach can be transferred to other applications, the experiment results cannot\! It is necessary to always evaluate and experiment with your own data.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* While the systematic approach can be transferred to other applications, the experiment results cannot. It is necessary to always evaluate and experiment with your own data.  
```

* The ESCI dataset does not have 100% coverage of the judgments. On average we saw roughly 35% judgment coverage among the top 10 retrieved results per query. This leaves us with some uncertainty.

The improvements tell us that we optimize our metrics on average when switching to hybrid search with the above parameter values. But of course there are queries that are winners and queries that are losers when doing this switch. This is something we can virtually always observe when comparing two search configurations with each other. While one configuration outperforms the other on average, not every query will profit from the configuration.

> 

Author: The meaning behind this is that some queries perform better as in their search quality metrics improve and some queries perform less well as in their search quality metrics decrease.
Let me try and find a more precise formulation.

The following chart shows the DCG@10 values of the training queries of the small query set. The x-axis represents the search pipeline with l2 norm, arithmetic mean, 0.1 lexical search weight, and 0.9 neural search weight (configuration A). The y-axis represents the search pipeline with an identical normalization and combination technique but switched weights: 0.9 lexical search weight and 0.1 neural search weight (configuration B).

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-12-xx-optimizing-hybrid-search/1_search_config_comparison.png" alt="Scatter Plot of DCG values for lexical-heavy search configuration and Neural-heavy search configuration" class="center"/>{:style="width: 100%; max-width: 800px; height: auto; text-align: center"}

> The queries with the highest search quality metrics improvements of configuration B are those that are located on the y-axis: they have a DCG score of 0 for this configuration. And for configuration A some even score above 15.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The queries with the highest search quality metric improvements of configuration B are those that are located on the y-axis: they have a DCG score of 0 for this configuration. And for configuration A some even score above 15.
```

> As we strive for improving the search quality metrics for all queries this now leads us to the question: improvements on average are fine but how can we tackle this in a more targeted way to come up with an approach that provides us the best configuration per-query instead of one good configuration for all queries?  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Striving to improve the search quality metrics for all queries raises the following question: improvements on average are fine, but how can we tackle this in a more targeted way to come up with an approach that provides the best configuration per query instead of one good configuration for all queries?  
```

# Dynamic hybrid search optimizer

> We call identifying a suitable configuration individually per hybrid search query *dynamic hybrid search optimization*. To move in that direction we treat hybrid search as a query understanding challenge: by understanding certain features of the query we develop an approach to predict the “neuralness” of a query. “Neuralness” is used as the term describing the neural search weight for the hybrid search queries.

Author: "query understanding" should be kept as it's an established term in search.

Looking at the top 5 configurations per search metric (DCG@10, NDCG@10 and Precision@10) only five out of the 15 pipelines have `min_max` as an alternative normalization technique and none of these configurations has another combination technique.

With that knowledge we assume the l2 normalization and the arithmetic mean combination technique to be best suited throughout the whole dataset.

That leaves us with the parameter values for the neural search weight and the lexical search weight. By predicting one we can calculate the other by subtracting the prediction from 1: by predicting the “neuralness” we can calculate the “lexicalness” by 1 - “neuralness”.

To validate our hypothesis that we came up with a couple of feature groups and features within these groups. Afterwards we trained machine learning models to predict an expected NDCG value for a given “neuralness” of a query.

> 

Author: They do, thanks 👍

## Feature groups and features

We divide the features into three groups: query features, lexical search result features and neural search result features:

* Query features: these features describe the user query string.  
* Lexical search result features: these features describe the results that the user query retrieves when executed as a lexical search.  
* Neural search result features: these features describe the results that the user query retrieves as a neural search.

> 

Author: Yes, makes sense 👍

### Neural search result features

* Maximum semantic score: the maximum semantic score of the retrieved top 10 documents. This is the score we receive for a neural query based on the query’s similarity to the title.  
* Average semantic score: By contrast to BM 25 scores the semantic scores are normalized and in the range of 0 to 1\. Using the average score seems more reasonable than going for the sum here.

## Feature engineering

As training data we used the output of the global hybrid search optimizer. As part of this process we ran every query 66 times: once per hybrid search configuration. For each query we calculated the search metrics and as a result we know per query which pipeline worked best, thus also which “neuralness” (neural search weight) worked best. We used the best NDCG@10 value per query as the metric deciding what the ideal “neuralness” was.

> 

Author: They do, thanks 👍

That leaves us with 250 queries (small query set) or 5,000 queries (large query set) together with their “neuralness” values for which they achieved best NDCG@10 values. Next, we engineered the nine features for each query. This constitutes the training and test data.

## Model training and evaluation

> 

Reviewer 3: Line 276: "we're on the right track with that approach" => "our approach was suitable"?

With the appropriate data at hand we explored different algorithms and experimented with different model fitting settings to identify patterns and evaluate if we’re on the right track with that approach.  

> We went for two relatively simple algorithms: linear regression and random forest regression.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We used two relatively simple algorithms: linear regression and random forest regression.  
```

> We applied cross validation, regularization, and tried out all different feature combinations. This resulted in interesting findings that are summarized in the following section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We applied cross-validation, regularization, and tried out all different feature combinations. This resulted in interesting findings that are summarized in the following section.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Because we say "in the following section", should there be an H3 here like " ### Findings"?

Author: I don't see an extra H3 heading , so I'm changing the heading of this paragraph to "## Model training and evaluation findings" (added "findings")

> **Dataset size matters**: Working with the differently sized datasets revealed that the amount of data matters when training and evaluating the models. The larger dataset reported a smaller Root Mean Squared Error compared to the smaller dataset. It also results in less variation of the RMSE scores within the cross-validation runs (that is when comparing the RMSE scores within one cross validation run for one feature combination).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Dataset size matters**: Working with the differently sized datasets revealed that the amount of data matters when training and evaluating the models. The larger dataset reported a smaller Root Mean Squared Error compared to the smaller dataset. It also results in less variation of the RMSE scores within the cross-validation runs (that is, when comparing the RMSE scores within one cross-validation run for one feature combination).
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Line 280: What is referenced by "It" in "It also results"? Can we name what we're referencing instead of using "It"?

> **Model performance differs among the different algorithms**: the best RMSE score for the random forest regressor was 0.18 compared to 0.22 for the best linear regression model (large dataset) \- both with different feature combinations though. The more complex model (random forest) is the one that performs better. However, better performance comes with the trade-off of longer training times for this more complex model.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Model performance differs among the different algorithms**: The best RMSE score for the random forest regressor was 0.18 compared to 0.22 for the best linear regression model (large dataset)---both with different feature combinations, though. The more complex model (random forest) performs better. However, better performance comes with the trade-off of longer training times for this more complex model.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Line 282: I assumed that instead of `\-`, we wanted an em dash.

> **Feature combinations of all groups have the lowest RMSE**: the lowest error scores can be achieved when combining features from all three feature groups (query, lexical search result, neural search result). Looking at RMSE scores for feature combinations within the feature groups shows that working with lexical search result feature combinations only serves as the best alternative.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Feature combinations of all groups have the lowest RMSE**: The lowest error scores can be achieved when combining features from all three feature groups (query, lexical search result, and neural search result). Looking at RMSE scores for feature combinations within the feature groups shows that working with lexical search result feature combinations only serves as the best alternative.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Line 284, last sentence: Can "only" be safely removed?

> This is particularly interesting when thinking about productionizing this: putting an approach like this in production means that features need to be calculated per query during query time. Getting lexical search result features and neural search result features requires running these queries which would add significant latency to the overall query even prior to inference time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is particularly interesting when thinking about productionizing this: putting an approach like this in production means that features need to be calculated per query during query time. Getting lexical search result features and neural search result features requires running these queries, which would add significant latency to the overall query even prior to inference time.
```

> The following picture shows the distribution of RMSE scores within one cross validation run when fitting random forest regression models with feature combinations within one group (blue: neural search features, red: lexical result features, green: query features) and across the groups (purple: features from all groups). The feature mix (purple) scores lowest (best), followed by training on lexical search result features only (red).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following image shows the distribution of RMSE scores within one cross-validation run when fitting random forest regression models with feature combinations within one group (blue: neural search features, red: lexical result features, green: query features) and across the groups (purple: features from all groups). The feature mix (purple) scores lowest (best), followed by training on lexical search result features only (red).
```

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-12-xx-optimizing-hybrid-search/2_random_forest_best_feature_combinations.png" alt="Box plot showing the distribution of RMSE scores within one cross validation run when fitting the random forest regression model" class="center"/>{:style="width: 100%; max-width: 800px; height: auto; text-align: center"}

> The overall picture does not change when looking at the numbers for the linear model:  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The overall picture does not change when looking at the numbers for the linear model.
```

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-12-xx-optimizing-hybrid-search/3_linear_model_best_feature_combinations.png" alt="Box plot showing the distribution of RMSE scores within one cross validation run when fitting the linear regression model"  class="center"/>

## Model testing

> 

Reviewer 3: Line 296: "on" => "to"?

> Let’s look how the trained models perform when applying them dynamically on our test set.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's look at how the trained models perform when applying them dynamically on our test set.  
```

> For each query of the test set we engineer the features and let the model make the inference for the “neuralness” values between 0.0 and 1.0, since “neuralness” also is a feature that we pass into the model. We then take the neuralness value that resulted in the highest prediction which is the best NDCG value. By knowing the “neuralness” we can calculate the “lexicalness” by subtracting the “neuralness” from 1.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For each query of the test set we engineer the features and let the model make the inference for the "neuralness" values between 0.0 and 1.0 because "neuralness" is also a feature that we pass into the model. We then take the "neuralness" value that resulted in the highest prediction, which is the best NDCG value. By knowing the "neuralness" we can calculate the "lexicalness" by subtracting the "neuralness" from 1.
```

> We again use the l2 norm and arithmetic mean as our hybrid search normalization and combination parameter values as they scored best in the global hybrid search optimizer experiment. With that we build the hybrid query, execute it, retrieve the results and calculate the search metrics like in the baseline and global hybrid search optimizer. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We again use the l2 norm and arithmetic mean as our hybrid search normalization and combination parameter values because they scored best in the global hybrid search optimizer experiment. With that, we build the hybrid query, execute it, retrieve the results, and calculate the search metrics like with the baseline and global hybrid search optimizer. 
```

> Metrics for the small dataset:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following are the metrics for the small dataset.
```

> | Metric | Baseline BM25 | Global Hybrid Search Optimizer | Dynamic Hybrid Search Optimizer - Linear Model | Dynamic Hybrid Search Optimizer - Random Forest Model |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Metric | Baseline BM25 | Global Hybrid Search Optimizer | Dynamic Hybrid Search Optimizer – Linear Model | Dynamic Hybrid Search Optimizer – Random Forest Model |
```

| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| DCG@10 | 9.65 | 9.99 | 10.92 | 10.92 |
| NDCG@10 | 0.24 | 0.26 | 0.28 | 0.28 |
| Precision@10 | 0.27 | 0.29 | 0.32 | 0.32 |

> Metrics for the large dataset:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following are the metrics for the large dataset.
```

> | Metric | Baseline BM25 | Global Hybrid Search Optimizer | Dynamic Hybrid Search Optimizer - Linear Model | Dynamic Hybrid Search Optimizer - Random Forest Model |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Metric | Baseline BM25 | Global Hybrid Search Optimizer | Dynamic Hybrid Search Optimizer – Linear Model | Dynamic Hybrid Search Optimizer – Random Forest Model |
```

| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| DCG@10 | 8.82 | 9.30 | 10.13 | 10.13 |
| NDCG@10 | 0.23 | 0.25 | 0.27 | 0.27 |
| Precision@10 | 0.24 | 0.27 | 0.29 | 0.29 |

> Looking at these numbers shows us a steady positive trend starting from the baseline going all the way to the dynamic predictions of lexicalness and neuralness per query. The large dataset shows a DCG increase of 8.9% rising from 9.3 to 10.13, the small dataset shows an increase of 9.3%. The other metrics increase as well: NDCG shows an improvement of 7.4%for the large dataset, 10.3% for the small dataset, Precision shows an improvement of 8% for the large dataset and 7.7% for the small dataset.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Looking at these numbers shows us a steady positive trend starting from the baseline and going all the way to the dynamic predictions of "lexicalness" and "neuralness" per query. The large dataset shows a DCG increase of 8.9%, rising from 9.3 to 10.13, and the small dataset shows an increase of 9.3%. The other metrics increase as well: NDCG shows an improvement of 7.4% for the large dataset and 10.3% for the small dataset, and Precision shows an improvement of 8% for the large dataset and 7.7% for the small dataset.
```

> Interestingly, both models score exactly equally. The reason for this is that while they both predict different NDCG values, they predict the best ones with the same “neuralness” as an input feature. So while the models may differ in RMSE scores during the evaluation phase, they provide equal results when applied to the test set.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Interestingly, both models score exactly equally. The reason for this is that while they both predict different NDCG values, they predict the best ones with the same "neuralness" as an input feature. So while the models may differ in RMSE scores during the evaluation phase, they provide equal results when applied to the test set.
```

> Despite the low judgement coverage we see improvements for all metrics. This gives us confidence that this approach can provide value for search systems not only switching from lexical to hybrid search but also those who already are in production but have never used any systematic process to evaluate and identify the best settings.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Despite the low judgement coverage, we see improvements for all metrics. This gives us confidence that this approach can provide value not only for search systems switching from lexical to hybrid search but also for those that are already are in production but have never used any systematic process to evaluate and identify the best settings.
```

# Conclusion

> We provide a systematic approach to optimizing hybrid search in OpenSearch based on its current state and capabilities (normalization & combination techniques). The results look promising especially given the low judgment coverage that the ESCI dataset has.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We provide a systematic approach to optimizing hybrid search in OpenSearch based on its current state and capabilities (normalization and combination techniques). The results look promising, especially given the low judgment coverage provided by the ESCI dataset.
```

> We encourage everyone to adopt the approach and explore its usefulness in their domain with their dataset. We are looking forward to hearing about the experimentation results the community has with the provided approach.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We encourage everyone to adopt the approach and explore its usefulness with their dataset. We look forward to hearing the community's feedback on the provided approach.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Line 327: Should we include how they can provide their feedback (link)?

Author: There's no dedicated feedback or anything similar that I see appropriate to link here. Do you have a suggestion? Something like reach out to the author on OpenSearch Slack?

Reviewer 3: Maybe on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/)?

# Future work

> The currently planned next steps include replicating the approach with a dataset that has higher judgment coverage and covers a different domain to see its generalizability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The currently planned next steps include replicating the approach with a dataset that has higher judgment coverage and covers a different domain in order to determine its generalizability.
```

> Optimizing hybrid search typically is not the first step in search result quality optimization. Optimizing lexical search results first is especially important as the lexical search query is part of the hybrid search query. Bayesian optimization is an efficient technique to efficiently identify the best set of fields and field weights, sometimes also referred to as learning to boost.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Optimizing hybrid search is not typically the first step in search result quality optimization. Optimizing lexical search results first is especially important because the lexical search query is part of the hybrid search query. Bayesian optimization is an efficient technique for efficiently identifying the best set of fields and field weights, sometimes also referred to as "learning to boost."
```

> The straightforward approach of trying out 66 different combinations can be created more elegantly by applying a technique like Bayesian optimization as well. In particular for large search indexes and a large amount of queries we expect this to result in a performance improvement.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The straightforward approach of trying out 66 different combinations can be performed more elegantly by applying a technique like Bayesian optimization as well. In particular, we expect this to result in a performance improvement for large search indexes and large numbers of queries.
```

> Reciprocal rank fusion is another way of combining lexical search and neural search, currently under active development:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Reciprocal rank fusion, currently under active development, is another way of combining lexical search and neural search:
```

* [https://github.com/opensearch-project/neural-search/issues/865](https://github.com/opensearch-project/neural-search/issues/865)  
* [https://github.com/opensearch-project/neural-search/issues/659](https://github.com/opensearch-project/neural-search/issues/659) 

> We also plan to include this technique, as well to identify the best way of running hybrid search dynamically per query.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We also plan to include this technique and to identify the best way of running hybrid search dynamically per query.
```
